hello and welcome to the first lecture of computer architecture for everybody in
this lecture we're going to talk about the origins of data, computing, lines,
straight lines and curves and numbers and how our obsession with measuring our
real world led to eventually computing so we're going to cover a number of
different topics we're going to talk about measuring the solar system and how
looking up at the night sky and trying to understand how the night sky works
continuous physical analog computing using things like slide rules and how we
did multiplication using slide rules back in the day talk about digital
physical devices such as like even a clicky pen is kind of a digital physical
device and that it's it's it's not digital but it has two distinct states
and it's stable in both states and that's digital so pen clocks another
digital physical device is one of these little clicky things that people use to
calculate their grocery bill as they were shopping before we had hand
calculators the other thing that people did is before we had hand calculators
that could conveniently calculate sine and cosine we had these really big books
that had tables of numbers so that you could look up sine and cosine in those
books and so we'll eventually move from there on to human computers which is
iteration by lots rooms full of people doing calculations or the average
difference engine which was steam-powered that could calculate
polynomials and then we move into electromechanical computers like the
bomba or pinball machines and then eventually we end up on the first
electronic computer using tubes called Colossus at Bletchley Park and so that
is leads us to the beginning of the electronic computer age now I really
want to tell you that this is not a class about mathematics numbers are kind
of the obsession in the beginning because computation in numbers were a
big deal but if you take my C class C programming for everybody I talk a lot
about how everything in computing changed in 1978 there's other important
moments where things changed in a dramatic way but before 1978 a lot of
computing had to do with numbers numbers were the focus there was no internet
there was no email computers were large filled a room they were very expensive
millions and millions of dollars and you use them to do numeric calculations that
were otherwise impractical but after 1978 computers got smaller and faster and the
internet kind of came along and people stopped doing numbers is the main thing
the computers did of course computers are still good at numbers but they're no
longer the main thing that we do we do it mostly for communication and data
artificial intelligence and those kinds of things although numbers are important
part of artificial intelligence but in general the arc of computers and
computing sort of starts and for its early early phases it's all about the
numbers and so there's a few math examples but I'll explain all the math
where it needs to be so the big problem that we humans are trying to solve with
numeric calculations and formulas etc is the notion of the fact that light
travels in straight lines and so when we see things with our eyes we see a world
that seems to be straight line but everything else in that world is moving
in a curved path so for example if I were to throw a softball to you that
softball would follow a parabola and so through millennia of evolution our eyes
have learned to calculate parabolas otherwise we would not be able to throw
and catch a ball and yes I'm using a sports analogy right now meaning that
how does one see a ball and hit it with a bat in a game of wheelchair softball
how does that happen but really a lot of what we do in sports today is
something that used to have to do with survival gathering food fighting other
kinds of things that were part of our survival so this notion that we are
people with eyes that see things in lines perceiving a world of curves so
one of the first fascinations with the world of curves has to do with star
gazing
everybody who sits outside at night and looks up into a clear night sky with
various patterns of stars slowly moving around it's natural to wonder exactly
what's up there and humans throughout all of our history have you know come up
with explanations for why the stars were doing what they were doing one of the
things that we could look at and measure a little more easily than other things
in terms of the motion of the skies is the sunrise and the sunset of the well
the rise in the set of the moon and the stars and the Sun because they changed
but then after a while if you watch them and measure them they change in a very
very specific pattern and so here I'm showing you a picture of the series of
sunsets that I constructed underneath the Mackinac bridge in northern Michigan I
took this picture in August and they're one of those sons is real the rest of
them are sort of made-up sons but you could at this point use the motion of
the sunset against the horizon as something that would tell you about the
season of the year and it turns out that tracking these seasons has been
important for all of our cultures for ten thousand years and the reason is is
the location of the sunset tells us about the weather when are the rains
going to happen when should we plant crops when is it dangerous and there's a
song that we in the state of Michigan of a certain age called the wreck of the
Edmund Fitzgerald that talks about how when you are in Lake Superior no matter
how large of a boat you have the gales of November will come after you and this
was a gigantic boat modern boat and there was enough wind in a November
storm that sunk the Edmund Fitzgerald and it was quite shocking because in the
1970s we thought technology would solve everything and so but this is a good
example of how not knowing what time of year you're going to do something set
out on a long journey or whatever could have some significant consequences and
if we look back in history there are many artifacts across many cultures that
are based on tracking the Sun calendars of various kinds some are tracking the
Sun some of the Sun in the moon and they are solar calendars of one form or
another that look at the sunrise and Sunset angles from various places
one of the older and most sophisticated ones is Stonehenge now these were all
over the world right just in all cultures of various sizes and forms etc
and so I've listed on this slide some of the various times that different
cultures invented various things having to do with the Sun and if you look at
some of those dates you're like whoa Stonehenge was pretty far pretty long
time ago compared to some of these other things and so we in the modern world we
have our fun time with modern hinges if you go to a certain street in Manhattan
on a certain day at a certain time you see this theme of light and I'm sure
that's what fascinated early people as they built these things was that you
know the light seems random and then all of a sudden like like a laser beam whoosh
the light comes down this long corridor and in the case of Manhattan it's like a
mile or so and the light just burst through and there's one in Chicago where
again you stand at a particular location and the Sun these are Sunrises comes
right to you in an otherwise dark thing and it again you could imagine that early
people would see this this burst of the Sun into a dark location is somehow a
very mystical moment in a very mystical event and and Stonehenge a lot of folks
think that Stonehenge was there to decide when to have certain celebrations
right so a spring celebration a summer solstice celebration etc and so at the
bottom you can see a what I'll call a dr. Chuck's commute hinge where I just
happen to be driving in a while ago and the Sun was at a perfect angle that it
came up underneath it was just rising and it came up underneath a overpass and
I just kind of clicked the button on my cell phone so that I could capture this
moment again that's a that's a moment that has to be a location time time day
of year and then you could see that if you stood there and again I don't really
particularly celebrate or good I don't go down every fall to try to catch this
sunrise underneath this bridge but you get the idea that you're like whoa this
this object in this in the sky was moving randomly and now all of a sudden
today it's shooting right at me through a little tiny hole and you can you can
kind of imagine that the builders of Stonehenge were quite interested in the
moment that the Sun would appear and burst onto them and if you were standing
somewhere it'd be dark and then you would be like a beam of direct light
would be on you and so it's pretty exciting now there was a lot of
iteration in several kind of concentric structures at Stonehenge that were
built between 5100 years ago and 3600 years ago and so in to some degree you
could imagine that by the time they were done with this they had a pretty good
sense of where the Sun rose and sunset as it moved across the horizon around
Stonehenge and you can think of it as like it's a data table that's been
tracking the Sun had been tracking the Sun for 2500 years so up next we're
going to talk about moving things everything up to now I've talked about
is just like measuring the Sun a sundial but up next we'll talk about analog
devices with gears and pulleys etc that attempt to do some computations and
we'll stick with in the beginning the obsession with the location of the Sun